doc/g191.md, before:

# Draft Recommendation ITU-T G.191 - Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization

**IMPORTANT NOTE:** This markdown document is a working text in preparation to the standardization of the next release of the Software Tool Library. The official text for Recommendation ITU-T G.191 is available here: [https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191)


## Summary

This revision only introduces changes to ITU-T G.191 Annex A, which describes the ITU-T Software Tools (STL) containing a high-quality, portable C code library for speech processing applications. This new release of the STL – dubbed STL2009 – incorporates many changes in software and manual. The new sets of tools addedare: ITU‑T G.728 fixed-/floating-point executables, basic ITU‑T G.722 frame-erasure concealments (G.722 PLC0 and PLC1), program ROM counting, floating point complexity evaluation, stereo operation and bitstream truncation. There have been also updates such as addition of new filters to rate change tools, more options added for frequency response calculations, adaptation of error-insertion device to embedded-variable bitstream, addition of impulse responses to the reverberation processing tool and update to make ITU‑T G.722/ITU‑T G.192 compliant. Corrections of several known problems have also been implemented. The associated STL user&#39;s manual has also been updated.This Recommendation includes an electronic attachment containing STL2009 Software Tool Library and manual.

## CONTENTS

1. General
2. Software tools
3. License and copyright

Annex A – List of software tools available

Annex B – ITU-T software tools General Public License


Electronic attachment: STL2009 Software Tool Library and manual

# Recommendation ITU-T G.191 - Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization

## 1. General

In the process of generating speech and audio coding standards, the following situations often happen:

* In many cases, experimental results generated with different software tools may not be directly compared.

* Software tools used by different organizations may not perfectly conform to related ITU‑T Recommendations, which may delay ITU-T standardization processes.

* ITU-T Recommendations may leave scope for different implementations.

* New speech and audio coding standards are increasing in complexity, leading to non‑bitexact specifications; furthermore, appropriate testing procedures to assure interoperability of different implementations are needed.

The need for a common set of tools has been recognized in past ITU-T standardization activities of speech algorithms. As a consequence, a library of portable, interworkable and reliable software routines has been established.

## 2. Software tools

To clarify the use of the set of software tools, arranged as a software tool library, the ITU-T makes the following recommendations:

1) The software tools specified in Annex A should be used as building modules of signal processing blocks to be used in the process of generation of ITU-T Recommendations, particularly those concerned with speech and audio coding algorithms.

2) Some of the tools shall be used in procedures for the verification of interoperability of ITU‑T standards, mainly of speech and audio coding algorithms whose description is in terms of non-bitexact specifications.

3) The use of these modules should be made strictly in accordance with the technical instructions of their attached documentation, and should respect the following terms.

## 3. License and copyright

The modules in the ITU-T Software Tool Library (STL) are free software; they can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of the "ITU-T software tools General Public License" of Annex B, as published by the ITU-T; this applies to any of the versions of the modules in the STL.

The STL has been carefully tested and it is believed that both the modules and the example programs on their usage conform to their description documents. Nevertheless, the ITU-T STL is provided "as is", in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty.

The STL is intended to help the scientific community to achieve new standards in telecommunications more efficiently, and for such must not be sold, entirely or in parts. The original developers, except where otherwise noted, retain ownership of their copyright, and allow their use under the terms and conditions of the "ITU-T software tools General Public License".

Commit message:

Updated the summary to reflect the changes brought to the new release.

doc/g191.md, after:

# Draft Recommendation ITU-T G.191 - Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization

**IMPORTANT NOTE:** This markdown document is a working text in preparation to the standardization of the next release of the Software Tool Library. The official text for Recommendation ITU-T G.191 is available here: [https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191)


## Summary

This revision introduces changes to ITU-T G.191 Annex A, which describes the ITU-T Software Tools (STL) containing a high-quality, portable C code library for speech processing applications. This new release of the STL, also known as STL2018, incorporates new basic operators to accommodate state-of-the-art processor architectures which supports wide accumulators, SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) and VLIW (Very Long Instruction Word). Thus the new operators provides support for 64-bit accumulator, complex numbers, enhanced 32-bit operations and additional control code operators.

The software package was also reworked to enable its maintenance on open source platforms. A CMake framework is now used for the generation of makefile crafted for the target platform and for the execution of regression tests for each module in the STL.

## CONTENTS

1. General
2. Software tools
3. License and copyright

Annex A – List of software tools available

Annex B – ITU-T software tools General Public License


Electronic attachment: STL2009 Software Tool Library and manual

# Recommendation ITU-T G.191 - Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization

## 1. General

In the process of generating speech and audio coding standards, the following situations often happen:

* In many cases, experimental results generated with different software tools may not be directly compared.

* Software tools used by different organizations may not perfectly conform to related ITU‑T Recommendations, which may delay ITU-T standardization processes.

* ITU-T Recommendations may leave scope for different implementations.

* New speech and audio coding standards are increasing in complexity, leading to non‑bitexact specifications; furthermore, appropriate testing procedures to assure interoperability of different implementations are needed.

The need for a common set of tools has been recognized in past ITU-T standardization activities of speech algorithms. As a consequence, a library of portable, interworkable and reliable software routines has been established.

## 2. Software tools

To clarify the use of the set of software tools, arranged as a software tool library, the ITU-T makes the following recommendations:

1) The software tools specified in Annex A should be used as building modules of signal processing blocks to be used in the process of generation of ITU-T Recommendations, particularly those concerned with speech and audio coding algorithms.

2) Some of the tools shall be used in procedures for the verification of interoperability of ITU‑T standards, mainly of speech and audio coding algorithms whose description is in terms of non-bitexact specifications.

3) The use of these modules should be made strictly in accordance with the technical instructions of their attached documentation, and should respect the following terms.

## 3. License and copyright

The modules in the ITU-T Software Tool Library (STL) are free software; they can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of the "ITU-T software tools General Public License" of Annex B, as published by the ITU-T; this applies to any of the versions of the modules in the STL.

The STL has been carefully tested and it is believed that both the modules and the example programs on their usage conform to their description documents. Nevertheless, the ITU-T STL is provided "as is", in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty.

The STL is intended to help the scientific community to achieve new standards in telecommunications more efficiently, and for such must not be sold, entirely or in parts. The original developers, except where otherwise noted, retain ownership of their copyright, and allow their use under the terms and conditions of the "ITU-T software tools General Public License".
